README.md, before:

# HOW TO RUN

1. Create and activate virtual env, and install dependencies (Windows example below), or install dependency packages from `requirements.txt` in your global env.
```
../reyrey > python -m venv myenv
../reyrey > myenv\Scripts\activate
../reyrey (myenv) > pip install -r requirements.txt
```

2. Run GUI.py
```
../reyrey (myenv) > python src\GUI.py
```

3. Exit venv when done
```
../reyrey (myenv) > deactivate
```


# User instructions

The program is a GUI interface for designing optical beamlines for reshaping of laser beams based on [Ray transfer matrix analysis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ray_transfer_matrix_analysis). The program provides the following functionality:

- Design a beam shaping line by inserting optical components and setting the input beam parameters
- Design linear and ribbon cavities (Or add your own)
- Calculate and plot beam waist transformations based on the optical line components
- Save & Load optical line configurations for future use

In the `savestates/samples` folder there are example setups for playing around.

Note that if cavity parameters are unstable, currently the cavity calculations simply fail and produce null output (no plot). To get a stable cavity to start optimizing parameters from one can use as an initial guess: 

`l_focus = l_free = 1.2 * R_focus` and `theta = 10 deg`.

Note: Typically the optimisation for a SHG cavity should aim on smallest round waist at focus arm, and matching the beamline focus on the free arm focus as best you can. With a ribbon cavity the free arm focus is typically elliptical, so getting a perfect matching is a tad tough with a circular beam => Match between (see sample HRG486MM).

## Explanation of the UI:

See [GUIdoc.md](docs/GUIdoc.md)


## Important notes

- For the time being, all length parameters are depicted in meters, unless otherwise specified. Will get around to clarifying that later.

# Structure of project:

- `main.py` is responsible for running the main program loop
- `calctest.py` is a test script for checking that ray transfer calculations are working ok, not needed for operation.
- GUI components are located in the aptly named `GUI_components` folder. 
- `GUI_LineGUI.py` imports different types of optical line components and arranges them inside the main window
- `GUI_OptLineProto.py` defines the prototype class for optical lines. Use this as base if you want to build a new type of optical system.
- Specific optical systems should be defined in their own files, e.g. `GUI_OpticalLine.py` and `GUI_cavities.py` implementing free optical beamlines and ribbon & linear optical cavities, respectively.
- Ray transfer calculation code is in the `GUI_components/raycalc` folder. If one wishes to implement new types of optical components for optical beams, they should be added to `matrices.py`.
- Project documentation and planning found in docs/projectdocum.md

# Credit

Credit to Artem Golovizin for providing the basis for the ray transfer calculations.

Commit message:

Added scatterplot autoscale to TODOlist

README.md, after:

# HOW TO RUN

1. Create and activate virtual env, and install dependencies (Windows example below), or install dependency packages from `requirements.txt` in your global env.
```
../reyrey > python -m venv myenv
../reyrey > myenv\Scripts\activate
../reyrey (myenv) > pip install -r requirements.txt
```

2. Run GUI.py
```
../reyrey (myenv) > python src\GUI.py
```

3. Exit venv when done
```
../reyrey (myenv) > deactivate
```


# User instructions

The program is a GUI interface for designing optical beamlines for reshaping of laser beams based on [Ray transfer matrix analysis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ray_transfer_matrix_analysis). The program provides the following functionality:

- Design a beam shaping line by inserting optical components and setting the input beam parameters
- Design linear and ribbon cavities (Or add your own)
- Calculate and plot beam waist transformations based on the optical line components
- Save & Load optical line configurations for future use

In the `savestates/samples` folder there are example setups for playing around.

Note that if cavity parameters are unstable, currently the cavity calculations simply fail and produce null output (no plot). To get a stable cavity to start optimizing parameters from one can use as an initial guess: 

`l_focus = l_free = 1.2 * R_focus` and `theta = 10 deg`.

Note: Typically the optimisation for a SHG cavity should aim on smallest round waist at focus arm, and matching the beamline focus on the free arm focus as best you can. With a ribbon cavity the free arm focus is typically elliptical, so getting a perfect matching is a tad tough with a circular beam => Match between (see sample HRG486MM).

## Explanation of the UI:

See [GUIdoc.md](docs/GUIdoc.md)


## Important notes

- For the time being, all length parameters are depicted in meters, unless otherwise specified. Will get around to clarifying that later.

# Structure of project:

- `main.py` is responsible for running the main program loop
- `calctest.py` is a test script for checking that ray transfer calculations are working ok, not needed for operation.
- GUI components are located in the aptly named `GUI_components` folder. 
- `GUI_LineGUI.py` imports different types of optical line components and arranges them inside the main window
- `GUI_OptLineProto.py` defines the prototype class for optical lines. Use this as base if you want to build a new type of optical system.
- Specific optical systems should be defined in their own files, e.g. `GUI_OpticalLine.py` and `GUI_cavities.py` implementing free optical beamlines and ribbon & linear optical cavities, respectively.
- Ray transfer calculation code is in the `GUI_components/raycalc` folder. If one wishes to implement new types of optical components for optical beams, they should be added to `matrices.py`.
- Project documentation and planning found in docs/projectdocum.md

# TODO:

- Find a workaround for scatterplot autoscaling not working (matplotlib issue, does not support scatter collection)

# Credit

Credit to Artem Golovizin for providing the basis for the ray transfer calculations.
